Agentic RAG is powerful but it's simpler than you might think. Here's an explanation and demo. - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K6wpRkJrcpM

Transcript:
(00:00) Well, I have a treat in store for you today. Agentic rag is one of the juiciest topics in gen AI right now, and I have a whole explanation and demo lined up for you. Let's get started. Before I can explain agentic rag, I need to do a refresher on what is traditional, what is ordinary old rag. And of course, it's something you're probably very familiar with.
(00:22) It's this simple idea that when the user asks a question to an LLM, we could just take the user's question, pass it straight to an LLM, and take the answer from the LLM and just send that to the user. But there's something we can do that's just slightly better. We can take an extra step before we send the user's question to the LLM.
(00:44) And in that extra step, we look up to see whether we have any relevant information at all in our database, in our files, in whatever, that we could shove in the prompt as background information. And that might help the LLM to give a more informed answer. If the question is something like, "What is the user's favorite fruit?" We could shove in there a bit of text that describes the user's interests, and one of those bits of interest might be the user's favorite fruit.
(01:11) And then the LLM, equipped with that information, would be able to give a more informed answer. And so, rag, which stands for retrieval augmented generation, because we are retrieving stuff and we're using that to augment our message to the LLM, rag is all about how do you go about being smart about the way you select this relevant context to send the LLM.
(01:33) And perhaps one way you could do it that wouldn't be particularly smart would be just to do a text search, a string search in your data for words from the user's question. So if they ask, "What's the favorite fruit?" you look for the word fruit anywhere in your data. And the trouble with that is it's a bit brittle and janky, and it requires the exact word fruit to be somewhere in your data.
(01:52) And if instead they said something like, "My favorite healthy food is an apple," then you wouldn't find it. And so that's not a great approach. A better approach would be some kind of fuzzy search, something that looks for fruit with any capitals or any any similies to fruit, things like that.
(02:09) So some sort of fuzzy search with some wild cards might do a better job. But as you probably know, when we use the expression rag, we're referring to a particular kind of fuzzy search that's typically done, which is known as a semantic search. And a semantic search is a kind of search that uses LLMs in order to try and find information in our database that has a similar meaning as the meaning of the user's question.
(02:34) And we use a special technique involving vectors for that, which you probably encountered before. But this is traditional rag. The user asks a question, we find relevant context, and we use semantic search to do it using vectors, using a type of LLM called an embedding model or an encoder to look up relevant context.
(02:54) We shove it in our message to the LLM, and back comes an answer. That's it. It's traditional rag. You probably know this well. And if you don't know all about rag and vectors and you want to, then of course my AI engineer core track has an entire week devoted to rag, and perhaps the most important part of rag, which is how do you measure whether it's being effective or not.
(03:16) But I'm going to assume at this point that that you've got the idea, you see how rag works. Let's talk now about agentic rag. Now look, with agentic rag, you can get very fancy and do all sorts of clever things, but let's just start with the very simplest type of agentic rag. Let's go back to this diagram.
(03:33) The user's asked a question, we're sending that question to an LLM, and it's spitting out an answer. Okay, what's the agentic rag take on this? Well, it's perfectly simple, and you probably thought of it already. We can equip the LLM with a tool, a tool that allows it to do a semantic search, a tool that allows it to query the knowledge base based on similar information to a question.
(03:56) And we allow it to call that tool autonomously, as we'd say. It can call that tool, and it can call it multiple times if it wishes, in order to retrieve the most relevant context. And it can keep calling it with different query parameters as it tries to home in on the most useful context to answer the question.
(04:15) And so what we actually have here is an LLM that's got tools, and it's in a loop to achieve a goal of answering a user's question. And of course, an LLM with tools in a loop to achieve a goal is the very definition of an AI agent. So I can just write the word agent on there, and look, here we have it. This is agentic rag.
(04:36) And now we can make it a step more advanced, a step more complex, by saying, "Okay, so we could just equip the agent with a tool to do retrieval query like this." Or actually, we could separate that out and have it be a separate agent with its own LLM call, like this. We can equip the first agent with another agent that we'll call a retrieval agent that it uses as a tool.
(05:02) And that retrieval agent itself has the tool that does the querying. And that is really separating out the responsibility, and it allows us to frame the prompt to that second agent, the retrieval agent, to make sure that it's optimized not at just answering the question, but at retrieving the most relevant context in order to answer the question.
(05:22) And in doing so, we've separated out that responsibility. We now have a retrieval agent. And this is a more advanced form of agentic rag. But maybe you're thinking, "Okay, but why separate it out to a separate agent? What benefit does that have?" Well, of course, that's because you can now add more tools. You could have a tool that is just a traditional SQL query, allow the retrieval agent to query the database and and navigate through the SQL tables as it explores the data and tries to find relevant information. And you could
(05:52) have another tool, which is actually doing a web query. It's actually going and searching on the web, and maybe it's using some of the information that it got back from the semantic search to go and query something else on the web. Maybe there's some sort of interplay between using these different tools.
(06:07) And so the retrieval agent is something which is equipped with potentially multiple tools, and it sets about the task of finding out the most relevant context that can be used to augment the original agent. And it's common with these agent architectures to describe your retrieval agent as a research agent, because it's going out there and looking through a number of sources.
(06:31) It might include a vector database and a graph database. It might include a database that you call its memory. And doing this in this way, as I say, called a research agent, it's something that that I do often in my AI engineer agentic track and production track. In both cases, we build research agents.
(06:49) I may or may not have described it as agentic rag at the time, but hopefully now it's clear to you that all of these are different versions of agentic rag in action. But all of this is completely meaningless without a demo. And that's what we'll get to right now. And I'm in a repo that's called agentic rag, and there'll be a link to it in the description below, and there's instructions in the readme so you can get it set up.
(07:13) And we are now in agentic rag. I've set my kernel to be agentic rag. I'm in a Jupyter notebook called rag. Well, it's number one, rag.ipynb, and we're going to get started with a quick traditional rag example, which we can then lead into agentic rag and then more sophisticated agentic rag. Let's get into it. And if you're not too familiar with this stuff, just use this to get the gist of it.
(07:37) If you are, then then clone the repo, come in and do this too and see for yourself. I'm going to start by setting up we'll use GPT-4 mini as our model. We'll have a vector store, and I've got a bunch of facts. And my facts are in this JSON file that's called facts.jsonl. And facts.jsonl, it's a bunch of stuff about me.
(07:58) And I just got Claude code to write this by reading my LinkedIn profile and reading my personal webpage. And I slipped in a little extra thing myself. "Ed's favorite fruit is a banana" is in there. That isn't on my LinkedIn profile. I added that in. And so here we are. I've run some imports. I've loaded my environment variables.
(08:17) I've of course got my OpenAI API key in a file called .env right there. And if you followed the readme, you'll have done the same. Okay, and with that, I can start OpenAI and instantiate the Python client library, and we're good to go. Okay, so first up, I open the facts file, and I load in all of the facts. And if I print that out, it's loaded 36 facts starting with my first job after college. Very nice.
(08:43) Okay, next, we're going to take all of those facts, and we're going to shove them into a new data store from the open-source vector database Chroma that I use on my AI engineering core track course. And it's so easy to work with Chroma. It's lovely. It's free. It's just installed in our environment right here.
(09:02) We're going to create a Chroma database, and we are going to use OpenAI to find the vectors associated with all of the data, and we're going to shove that in our Chroma database. And let me make a little comment here. It's a common misconception that whilst we often loosely describe Chroma as being a vector database, a vector data store, we describe all of these as as that, what's really being stored is the text itself, the text information, and it's being indexed off these vectors.
(09:29) These vectors give us a way to query the data that we want in a really efficient way based on what data do we have that's most similar to a given vector. Okay, so I've turned my 36 facts into vectors, and I've shoved the 36 facts in the database indexed off their vectors. That has been done.
(09:50) And students of any of my courses know that I can't resist visualizing anything that I've turned into vectors. So let's just quickly look at what these vectors look like when they're put into the vector database. And this is the These are the 36 bits of information plotted as points in two-dimensional space, and you can see that that I've colored them in after the fact with what kind of information they are.
(10:13) And generally speaking, things like the green dots, which is work-related stuff, is in a different territory to the blue dots, which is general information, which is roughly in the middle. Green dots is about my my speaking stuff, like my Udemy courses, and the red dots are my interests, which presumably somewhere includes that my favorite fruit is a banana.
(10:32) Oh, look, here it is. There we go. Interest Ed's favorite fruit is a banana. I didn't lie. Okay, so now we'll do the same thing in 3D because I just love seeing these things in 3D. Here it is, and is that going to be the banana? Nope. Uh you know, we have to find this banana. >> [laughter] >> There we go.
(10:51) There we go. Ed's favorite fruit is a banana in 3D glory. But this is the data. These are the 36 points displayed in a vector form. These are all in the Chroma vector database, or to be clear, it's the data in the database, and it's indexed off its vector. Okay, and now we have a question. What is Ed's favorite fruit? Okay, and we will just call OpenAI. No rag here.
(11:15) openai.chat.completions.create. For this model, we will ask it that question, and we will see what it says. What is Ed's favorite fruit? It says, "I don't have enough information to know what Ed's favorite fruit is. If you could share a bit more context about Ed, I can help figure it out." Uh so, that is a vanilla call to GPT, and we can't blame it.
(11:35) It doesn't know who Ed is, and it's interesting that it even uses the word context. That is our clue. The way to get it to answer is to give it relevant context. RAG to the rescue. Okay, first step. We are going to turn our question, what is Ed's favorite fruit, into a vector, and then we're going to look up in Chroma.
(11:55) What data do we have? The three results that are closest to that question, and then I will print that out. And this is what we get back. Ed's favorite fruit is a banana is the first item back, which is just as well. And then some other stuff about me and my email address and my YouTube, if you want to subscribe, uh is right there. Uh okay.
(12:17) So, now we can make another call to OpenAI. We can ask it this question, but we can also say, "This context might be useful. Now, with this context, please answer the following question." So, let me just show you that. This is the prompt we can send it. This context might be useful, and then the three things that we've taken out of Chroma.
(12:37) Now, with this context, please answer the following question. What is Ed's favorite fruit? Answer. Lo and behold, good old-fashioned RAG. This question, as it is right here, is what we will now send the to GPT-5.4, and back we get the response, "Ed's favorite fruit is a banana." Well, now you know. So, that just shows you RAG in action, the traditional way.
(13:03) It was able to take the question, what is Ed's favorite fruit? It was able to discover that that point right there is the point that's closest to that question. It was able to suck that up. That is retrieval. We augmented the question with that context right here. That's what we sent to GPT-5.4 mini, and so we got back an accurate answer. That is RAG.
(13:24) Time to make it agentic. And now I've switched over to notebook two, agentic RAG. We start with some imports. We get ourselves set up. As before, we create the OpenAI Python client library and the connection to Chroma, and we have 36 documents in Chroma as expected. All right, here is a function called retrieve relevant context.
(13:47) It takes a query. It turns that into a vector. It looks up in Chroma what are the nearest points to it, and it returns the text for those points. That is what retrieve relevant context does. I took that code from the last lab. Okay, so if we call that function with what is Ed's favorite fruit, we should get back three documents, of which the banana one should be the first document.
(14:11) And there it is. Ed's favorite fruit is a banana. Ed goes by Ed or Edward, whichever you prefer, and so on. Okay, this function, perfectly simple, it's working. And now we turn it into a tool. We do it. We're using OpenAI agents SDK here that I cover on my AI engineer agentic track, and we're going to use the function tool decorator, and then retrieve relevant context tool is just a wrapper around calling that same function here.
(14:39) I've just wrapped it in something where I've got type hints, and I give some docstrings here because when I do that, the OpenAI agents SDK will turn this into something which has a description and a JSON schema, which means we can give this to an LLM, and we can have it be able to use that tool in order to achieve its goal.
(15:03) And hopefully you're thinking, "Could it really be this simple?" Because the answer is yes, it really is this simple. All this fancy talk about agentic RAG, and it's honestly just a few lines of code. So, let's have a question. What is Ed's favorite fruit? And now here, we're going to create an agent.
(15:19) This is using the OpenAI agents SDK. It's got a name expert. That's the model name, and then we call runner.run. We tell it we want to use this agent. We want to ask this question. Now, for this version, I'm not giving it a tool. It doesn't have access to this retrieval tool. I'm not passing that in.
(15:37) So, it's going to have a difficult time with this. We're expecting a similar answer to to the first one we did, where it's going to say, "I don't have the context. I don't know enough context to know which Ed you mean. Not a clue." Okay, so what's it like to use agentic RAG? It's exactly the same as this, but we just pass in the tool.
(15:56) We equip the agent with the tool retrieve relevant context tool. Otherwise, exactly the same. This is agentic RAG. Can it be this simple? Can this just work? It says, "Tool called retrieving relevant context. Ed's favorite fruit is a banana." And it says tool called there because I put a print statement in here. Did you see that? There we go.
(16:16) That's the print statement that got called, and so we can see that our LLM decided it was going to call a tool to retrieve relevant context, and as a result, it responded, "Ed's favorite fruit is a banana." That's it. That is agentic RAG. We just built it. But I know what you're thinking. You're thinking it's not really agentic RAG unless you have a separate retriever agent. Well, fine, then we'll do that.
(16:42) It's so easy. We'll have an set of instructions, "You are a retrieval agent. You are responsible for researching a question using your tools to find relevant context. Do not actually answer the question. Instead, use the tools to respond with context." If you don't say that, it's very hard to get a retrieval agent that won't answer the question.
(17:02) It's so determined to answer the question. So, we'll do that. We then set up our retrieval agent. It is a retriever. It That's the instructions, and as a tool, we're giving it the retrieval tool, and that That is what it's able to do. So, if we now run the retrieval agent with our question, it should retrieve the relevant context.
(17:21) Uh let's see what happens. It's calling the tool. Relevant context found. Ed's favorite fruit is a banana. It still basically answers the question. It's so hard to stop it doing that. But that is, I guess, the relevant context, so so fair enough. We'll We'll let it get away with it. And now, it's so simple with OpenAI agents SDK, we can turn this whole agent into a tool, exactly as I showed you on that diagram.
(17:43) We can turn the retrieval agent into a tool, which we can call retriever, and we can say, "Use this tool to retrieve relevant context." And now, one more time, we come back to our three lines of code. We're going to say, "Create an agent, call it an expert, and for its tools, we're going to give it retriever.
(18:05) " And retriever is itself a wrapper around this retrieval agent. If you're confused, look back at that diagram. It's exactly that diagram. And now, with that, we're going to run this, and this is proper agentic RAG in action. We're expecting it to print that message that it's calling a tool, and then respond that Ed's favorite fruit is a banana. Let's see if it works.
(18:25) It's thinking. It's called the tool. It's got the relevant context, and it's responded, "My favorite fruit is a banana." That is agentic RAG. Yeah, but I know what you're thinking now. You're thinking, "Okay, Ed, but it's not really agentic RAG if you don't have a research agent, maybe able to do a SQL query, maybe even with a graph database and a web search." To which I say, "Fine.
(18:47) Great. Well, that's the exercise for you. Go Go and build all of that. Add in more tools. Turn this into a really well-built out research agent, and then make a PR and contribute it to this repo so that I can share it with others. That would be really cool. I'd love to look at it, too.
(19:04) And if you're wondering, "Okay, but how do I know which one to use? Like which tools to add?" The answer is there's no shortcut to experimenting. It's It's a point that I really press home in my AI engineering courses. The right way to approach this is to build out a test data set of questions and answers with reference answers, and then run experiments.
(19:24) Try different tools. See which ones perform best for your use case, and that is the right tool to use. And that is how you build out really great agentic RAG. And I hope you enjoy it, and I hope to see you soon for another video.